Types are values of type `type` (#2360)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p2360.md

# Types are values of type `Type`

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/2360)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
    -   [Tuples behave inconsistently](#tuples-behave-inconsistently)
    -   [Qualified access to constraint members is inconsistent](#qualified-access-to-constraint-members-is-inconsistent)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Terminology](#terminology)
    -   [Compound member access](#compound-member-access)
    -   [Tuple and struct literals](#tuple-and-struct-literals)
    -   [Name lookup into values with constrained types](#name-lookup-into-values-with-constrained-types)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Alternative terminology](#alternative-terminology)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

Define a "type" to be a value of type `Type`. Contexts expecting a type perform

> an implicit conversion to `Type`. Values like `()` and `(i32, i32)` and `{}` are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an implicit conversion to `Type`. Values like `()`, `(i32, i32)`, and `{}` are
```

> ## Abstract
> 
> Define a "type" to be a value of type `Type`. Contexts expecting a type perform
> an implicit conversion to `Type`. Values like `()` and `(i32, i32)` and `{}` are
> no longer types, but instead implicitly convert to `Type`. Values of interface
> or constraint type (now called "kinds") are similarly not formally types but
> implicitly convert to `Type`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe slightly expand this to make it clear that this has a relatively small *change* to the design, and is more about terminology and more crisp concepts with some more minor changes to address narrow problems and make things more consistent?

```suggestion
## Abstract

Define a "type" to be a value of type `Type`. Contexts expecting a type perform
an implicit conversion to `Type`. Values like `()` and `(i32, i32)` and `{}` are
no longer types, but instead implicitly convert to `Type`. Values of interface
or constraint type (now called "kinds") are similarly not formally types but
implicitly convert to `Type`.

The practical impact to the semantics are relatively small. This is primarily
establishing more principled and clear terminology and concepts in the design
with a few more narrow fixes and improvements to the design's consistency.
```

Reviewer: Note in @chandlerc's suggested text, the repeated use of `and` makes for multiple potential readings.

Author: Rephrased a bit to avoid repeated `and`.

        `Hashable`, which is a subkind of `Type`.
-   A _facet_ is a value of a kind other than `Type`. For example,
    `i32 as Hashable` is a facet. Note that facets are not types.
-   We use the term _generic type_ to refer to a type or facet introduced by a
    `:!` binding, such as in a generic parameter or associated constant.
    -   This gives rise to terms such as _generic type parameter_ and
        _associated generic type_.
    -   It is worth noting that a generic type is not necessarily a type, as its
        type may be an interface or constraint rather than `Type`.

### Compound member access

The syntax `x.(Y)`, where `Y` names an instance member, now always performs
instance binding. Therefore, for a suitable `DebugPrintable`:

-   `1.(DebugPrintable.Print)()` still prints `1`, as before.
-   `i32.(DebugPrintable.Print)()` now prints `i32`, rather than forming a
    member name.
-   `1.(i32.(DebugPrintable.Print))()` is now an error, rather than printing
    `1`.

In order to get the old effect of `x.(MyType.(MyInterface.InstanceMember))()`,
one can now write `x.((MyType as MyInterface).InstanceMember)()`. This behaves
the same as the member access in:

```

> fn F[MyType:! MyInterface, X:! Type](x: X) -> auto {
>   return x.(MyType.InstanceMember)();

Reviewer 3: This example is doesn't look legal, since there is no way to deduce `MyType`. The smallest delta to make it compile would be:
```suggestion
fn F[MyType:! MyInterface, X:! MyType](x: X) -> auto {
  return x.(MyType.InstanceMember)();
```
But that doesn't really make sense since it defines `x.((MyType as MyInterface).InstanceMember)()` as `F(x)` which has free references to `MyInterface` and `InstanceMember` but not `MyType`.

I think the signature should instead be:
```suggestion
fn F(MyType:! MyInterface, x: MyType) -> auto {
  return x.(MyType.InstanceMember)();
```
And now `x.((MyType as MyInterface).InstanceMember)()` is equivalent to `F(MyType, x);`

so for example `(i32, i32, i32) as Type` evaluates to the type of `(1, 2, 3)`.

There is no conversion from a tuple type to a tuple value, because tuple types
are values of type `Type`, and the type `Type` does not implicitly convert to a
tuple type. For metaprogramming, it is likely that we will benefit from having a
mechanism to convert a tuple type into a tuple of types, but this is likely to
be possible using a variadic:

```
@'''
Takes a tuple of values. Returns a tuple containing the types of those values.
'''
fn TupleTypeToTupleOfTypes[Types:! Type,...](x: (Types,...)) -> auto {
  return (Types,...);
}
```

### Name lookup into values with constrained types

Given a generic function with a generic type parameter, uses of that parameter
will be implicitly converted to type `Type`. For example:

```
fn F[T:! Printable](x: T) { x.Print(); }
```

... is equivalent to ...

```
fn F[T:! Printable](x: T as Type) { x.Print(); }
```

As a result, we can no longer describe lookup for `x` as looking into the
type-of-type, that is, the type of the expression after `x:`, because after
implicit conversion, that expression is of type `Type`. Instead, lookup will

> look into the type of `x`, which symbolically evaluates to `T`, and will look at

Reviewer 3: This seems to be glossing over something. Didn't we just say the type of `x` is `T as Type` not `T`?

Author: Slightly rephrased. The point here is that we're performing a symbolic evaluation, and the result is... however the value `T` is symbolically represented as a value of type `Type`. We don't have the terminology to talk about that right now, I don't think, but I can hand-wave a bit better than I was :)

name of a generic type parameter, we will look in the type of `T`, which is
`Printable`.

## Rationale

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    -   Making the behavior of tuples and empty structs more like other types is
        easier for tooling to handle.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   The transition between templates and generics is made smoother by
        changing compound member access to behave consistently regardless of
        whether the left-hand operand is a type.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Bottoming out at the same type, `Type`, for all types is likely to be
        easier to understand. However, having `(i32, i32)` not be the type of a
        pair of integers, but instead be _implicitly convertible to_ the type of
        a pair of integers, is likely to be harder to understand. It's unclear
        which of these will be more dominant, but the new behavior is more
        consistent.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer: If this proposal is defining the name `Type`, should it also evaluate `type` [for the name]?

Also, @josh11b [had suggested](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/1035224624612524092) that `Type` be defined as `constraint Type {}`; is this proposal deciding it's not (given it doesn't say that it is)? Or is that an open question?

Note, if `Type` is a `constraint Type {}`, it may make it harder to distinguish what is and is not a Type, because you say interfaces aren't Type but they would match that constraint, right?

Author: This proposal is not defining the name `Type`. As far as I can tell, that name is currently provisional and will remain so under this proposal, but #2113 should tell us what to do with it. However, the idea that `constraint Type {}` is how `Type` is defined has already been decided in an approved proposal; I've added a link to that, along with the consequences for user-defined named constraints. I've added a "Things not being changed" section with all that information.

Reviewer: > #2113 should tell us what to do with it.

Okay, added a [reminder](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2113#issuecomment-1297781401) and a suggestion that the issue be renamed.

> `constraint Type {}`

Sorry I'd missed that, it's `{ }` in the doc and my search failed from that.

Reviewer 2: Just to add a bit of nuance as we've resolved #2113 but without it really fully answering this question...

I think that #2113 and some of our other naming decisions indicate that the spelling really should be `type` as a keyword. We should make that change as soon as we can IMO.

I also think there is a good reason to imagine that this isn't like `bool` in most ways. There is no *api* that we would want defined in the library here. And so I think its likely much simpler for the `type` keyword to just be an expression that produces the special type value desired, exactly as desired. In that sense it is much more an actual literal expression and a keyword seems the easy model for it.

> ### Alternative terminology

Reviewer 3: You might want to link to the [open discussion on 2022-10-27](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.lecxe8qywdxa) where we discussed these alternatives.

Author: Done.

        that are usable at compile time, and values of that type will be usable
        as types, in the same way that `()` and `{}` are.
-   There are no singleton type-of-types. It's still possible to have, for
    example, the type of `i32` be a type whose only value is `i32`. The value
    `i32` would then not formally be a type, as its type would not be `Type`,
    but it could still implicitly convert to `Type`, as `()` does, if we so
    desire.
    -   This extends to other cases: we could say that for integer literals,
        which we have recently been describing as having type `IntLiteral(n)`,
        there is an `impl IntLiteral(n) as ImplicitAs(Type)` which converts a
        value of type `IntLiteral(n)` to the `Type` value `IntLiteral(n)`. This
        would then permit `let v: 0 = 0;`.
    -   Such changes to `i32` or integer literals are not part of this proposal.

## Details

### Terminology

The changes to the language rules in this proposal are fairly small, but there
is a significant change in how we describe those rules. We now use the following
terminology:

-   A _type_ is a value of type `Type`.

> -   A _kind_ is a constrained or unconstrained version of `Type`, such as an

Reviewer 4: I'm struggling to fully understand this definition, because I don't fully understand what it means for something to be a "version of `Type`". If we're going to repurpose an existing type-theoretic term like "kind" for this, I think it really needs to have a clear definition.

        easier for tooling to handle.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   The transition between templates and generics is made smoother by
        changing compound member access to behave consistently regardless of
        whether the left-hand operand is a type.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Bottoming out at the same type, `Type`, for all types is likely to be
        easier to understand. However, having `(i32, i32)` not be the type of a
        pair of integers, but instead be _implicitly convertible to_ the type of
        a pair of integers, is likely to be harder to understand. It's unclear
        which of these will be more dominant, but the new behavior is more
        consistent.

## Alternatives considered

### Alternative terminology

We considered various alternatives for the terminology choices listed above in
[open discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.lecxe8qywdxa).

> Instead of "kind" we considered:

Reviewer 4: Is this consistent with the existing [type-theoretic meaning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kind_(type_theory)) of "kind"? It doesn't look like it to me, but I'm not very fluent with that part of type theory.

If not, it seems risky to repurpose a subtle type-theoretic term to describe a _different_ subtle corner of Carbon's type system,

Author: Yeah, I don't think this is entirely consistent with type-theoretical usage. What we're doing in Carbon at the kind level is very similar to the GHC [type-in-type](https://ghc.gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/doc/users_guide/exts/poly_kinds.html#overview-of-type-in-type) extension, which is basically saying that the type level and the kind level are the same thing. Suggestions for a better term would be appreciated!

Reviewer 3: If this does not match the broader usage of the word "kind", that would be a big concern for me. (I have no confidence in my understanding of the broader usage myself though.)

Reviewer 4: I don't have any ideas, but I wonder if it would help to have a term for "a type whose values can be implicitly converted to `Type`"? That seems like it might be a handy term in its own right, and might be a useful starting point for naming kinds (which are a subset of those things, IIUC).

### Terminology

The changes to the language rules in this proposal are fairly small, but there
is a significant change in how we describe those rules. We now use the following
terminology:

-   A _type_ is a value of type `type`.
-   A _facet type_ is a constrained or unconstrained version of `type`, such as
    an interface type or a named constraint type. We previously referred to a
    facet type as a type-of-type, but that is no longer accurate, as the type of
    any type is now by definition `type`.
-   A _facet_ is a value of a facet type. For example, `i32 as Hashable` is a
    facet, and `Hashable` is a facet type. Note that all types are facets.
    -   A facet value can be thought of as a tuple of a possibly-symbolic
        identity for a type, plus any witnesses needed to demonstrate that the
        type satisfies the constraints of the facet type. A type is then a facet
        value that has no witnesses.
-   We use the term _generic type_ to refer to a type or facet introduced by a
    `:!` binding, such as in a generic parameter or associated constant.
    -   This gives rise to terms such as _generic type parameter_ and
        _associated generic type_.

>     -   It is worth noting that a generic type is not necessarily a type, as its
>         type may be an interface or constraint rather than `type`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe slightly clearer to use the terminology above?

```suggestion
    -   It is worth noting that a generic type is not necessarily a type. It may
        be a facet, and its type may be a facet type rather than `type`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
    -   It is worth noting that a generic type is not necessarily a type. It may
        be a facet, and its type may be a facet type other than `type`.
```
(rather -> other, because `type` is a facet type.)

### `type` and `Core.Type`

This proposal introduces the name `type` as a keyword -- a type literal -- that
names the facet type with an empty set of constraints. This keyword replaces the
provisional name `Type` for this functionality.

In [issue #2113](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2113), it
was decided that such functionality may be an alias for a name in the prelude,
such as `Core.Type`. This proposal does not introduce a corresponding prelude
name. The facet type `type` is primitive and provided by the compiler, and not
an alias.

[As noted in the generics design](/docs/design/generics/details.md#named-constraints),
a declaration such as `constraint MyVersionOfType {}` would introduce a facet
type that is equivalent to `type`. This proposal does not change this decision.
Because such a named constraint `MyVersionOfType` is equivalent to `type`, that
is, because they are the same facet type, a value `T:! MyVersionOfType` is a

> type under this proposal.

Reviewer 2: I'm comfortable with this, but I think it would be good to include a rationale for the decision here?

And/or to include using an empty named constraint in the prelude in the alternatives considered?

Not looking for much, just to record a key point or two from the discussion we had here.

Author: My intent is that this proposal is not making a decision here. I think we might want a different outcome in this case. I've opened an issue for leads #2409 to discuss this further.

  // ✅ OK, same as `(Derived as Iface).Static()`.
  d.IfaceStatic();
  Derived.IfaceStatic();
  // ❌ Uses `Derived as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  Derived.IfaceMethod();
  // ✅ OK, uses `Derived as Iface`.
  d.IfaceMethod();
  d.(Derived.IfaceMethod)();
  d.((Derived as Iface).Method)();
  // ✅ OK, uses `Base as Iface`.
  d.(Base.IfaceMethod)();
  d.((Base as Iface).Method)();
}
```

### Tuple and struct literals

A tuple literal such as `(1, 2, 3)` produces a tuple value. Its type cannot be
written directly as a literal: the literal `(i32, i32, i32)` also produces a
tuple value, not a type value. However, the type of `(1, 2, 3)` is easy to
express: it is the result of implicitly converting `(i32, i32, i32)` to a type,
so for example `(i32, i32, i32) as type` evaluates to the type of `(1, 2, 3)`.

There is no conversion from a tuple type to a tuple value, because tuple types
are values of type `type`, and the type `type` does not implicitly convert to a
tuple type. For metaprogramming, it is likely that we will benefit from having a
mechanism to convert a tuple type into a tuple of types, but this is likely to
be possible using a variadic:

```

> @'''
> Takes a tuple of values. Returns a tuple containing the types of those values.
> '''

Reviewer 2: Just me, but I wouldn't start mixing in more new syntax here just yet?

```suggestion
// Takes a tuple of values. Returns a tuple containing the types of those values.
```

type parameter, we will look in the type of `T`, which is `Printable`.

## Rationale

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    -   Making the behavior of tuples and empty structs more like other types is
        easier for tooling to handle.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   The transition between templates and generics is made smoother by
        changing compound member access to behave consistently regardless of
        whether the left-hand operand is a type.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Bottoming out at the same type, `type`, for all types is likely to be
        easier to understand. However, having `(i32, i32)` not be the type of a
        pair of integers, but instead be _implicitly convertible to_ the type of
        a pair of integers, is likely to be harder to understand. It's unclear
        which of these will be more dominant, but the new behavior is more
        consistent.

## Alternatives considered

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

### Alternative member access rules

We considered rules where `T.(Interface.Member)` would either always mean
`(T as Interface).Member` or always mean `(typeof(T) as Interface).Member`, but that
did not allow aliases to work as expected. We wanted an alias to an interface method or
class function defined inside of a class to be usable as a method or class function
member of the class.

```
interface A {
  fn F[me: Self]();
  fn S();
}
class B {
  external impl as A;
  alias G = A.F;
  fn H[me: Self]();
  alias T = A.S;
  fn U();
}
```

We want `B.G` to act like a method of `B`, like `B.H`, and `B.T` to act like a static
class function of `B`, like `B.U`. We could have accomplished this by requiring those
aliases to be written in a different way, for example `alias G = (Self as A).F`, but
needing to do that was surprising. We made it work by making the interpretation of
`T.(Interface.Member)` depend on whether `Member` was an _instance_ member of
`Interface`, with an implicit `me` parameter, or not.

This was discussed in
[the #syntax channel on discord on 2022-11-07](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/1039298322625744987)
and in
[open discussion on 2022-11-10](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.1y65biik2vr).
````

### Alternative terminology

We considered various alternatives for the terminology choices listed above in

> [open discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.lecxe8qywdxa).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[open discussion on 2022-10-27](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.lecxe8qywdxa).
```

        that a class has an archetype parameter, as opposed to our chosen
        terminology of a generic type parameter.
-   constrained type variable
    -   Concern: for some of us, the name "constrained type" seemed to better
        describe facet types than facets.
-   type-like
    -   Concern: derived terms like "generic type-like parameter" and
        "associated type-like constant" are awkward.
-   kinded
    -   Concern: derived terms like "generic kinded parameter" and "associated
        kinded constant" are awkward.

Instead of "facet" we considered:

-   impl
    -   Concern: facets are analogous to `impl`s but are not in direct
        correspondence, because a facet can be for a constraint that involves
        multiple interfaces and hence potentially multiple `impl`s, and an
        `impl` can be for a constraint that involves multiple interfaces and
        hence a facet can refer to only _part of_ an `impl`.
-   archetype
    -   Concern: this seems inappropriate for non-generic facets, such as
        `i32 as Hashable`.
-   witness
    -   Concern: doesn't quite represent what we mean: a facet is more like a

>         pair of a type and a witness that that type implements the facet's type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        pair of a type and a witness that that type implements the facet's type.

### `Core.Type` is an empty named constraint

We considered making `type` an alias for an empty type constraint defined in the
prelude, `Core.Type`. FIXME: rationale

This was discussed in:

-   [#naming on 2022-10-31](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/963846118964350976/1036750048899366954)
-   [#syntax on 2022-10-27](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/1035222720864071740)
-   [open discussion on 2022-10-31](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.9x8m0qwhuux)
```

mechanism to convert a tuple type into a tuple of types, but this is likely to
be possible using a variadic:

```
// Takes a tuple of values. Returns a tuple containing the types of those values.
fn TupleTypeToTupleOfTypes[Types:! type,...](x: (Types,...)) -> auto {
  return (Types,...);
}
```

### Name lookup into values with constrained types

Given a generic function with a generic type parameter, uses of that parameter
will be implicitly converted to type `type`. For example:

```
fn F[T:! Printable](x: T) { x.Print(); }
```

... is equivalent to ...

```
fn F[T:! Printable](x: T as type) { x.Print(); }
```

As a result, we can no longer describe lookup for `x` as looking into the
type-of-type, that is, the type of the expression after `x:`, because after
implicit conversion, that expression is of type `type`. Instead, lookup will
look into the type of `x`, which symbolically evaluates to the value
corresponding to `T` in type `type`, and will look at that value to determine
where else to look. Because that value is symbolically the name of a generic
type parameter, we will look in the type of `T`, which is `Printable`.

> ## Rationale

Reviewer 2: Given the concerns I've heard around teachability, I think its worth explicitly adding a section to try to address that.

In the section, I think we should both acknowledge that the details of this model are likely to be challenging for new-comers, even ones with experience in C++. Then I think we should cover two points at least:

1) Some ideas of how we can try to mitigate the challenge here, maybe suggestions of our initial ideas around how to approach explaining or teaching it. Not looking for a lot of detail, but just to capture some of what has already been discussed like framing the initial message around "you write a tuple type as `(i32, i32)`", and only later diving into how that works at this level of detail. In discussing with someone else, analogies came up of classic cases where we do this in physics such as "spherical cows" or "ignoring air resistance".

2) Capture the point that this is a relatively small change in practice from where Carbon's design already is today, and we can and should still be open to more significant changes if this problem ends up being severe and needing it.

Does that make sense?

I know its new content, let me know if I can help with drafting.

Author: Added a section with this, let me know if you'd like more words there or feel free to apply some suggestions :)

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    -   Making the behavior of tuples and empty structs more like other types is
        easier for tooling to handle.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   The transition between templates and generics is made smoother by
        changing compound member access to behave consistently regardless of
        whether the left-hand operand is a type.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Bottoming out at the same type, `type`, for all types is likely to be
        easier to understand. However, having `(i32, i32)` not be the type of a
        pair of integers, but instead be _implicitly convertible to_ the type of
        a pair of integers, is likely to be harder to understand. It's unclear
        which of these will be more dominant, but the new behavior is more
        consistent.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 2: I think we should also capture the alternative of using two syntaxes such as:

```
var x: TupleType(i32, i32) = (1, 2);

// Or, with dedicated syntax:
var y: (|i32, i32|) = (1, 2);
```

That at least came up with some decent about of discussion with @camio and others I think, and its an important alternative to call out here. Others will wonder about it and we should make it clear that this wasn't just missed.

Reviewer 3: I added this at the bottom.

    -   [Name lookup into values with constrained types](#name-lookup-into-values-with-constrained-types)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
    -   [Teachability](#teachability)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Alternative member access rules](#alternative-member-access-rules)
    -   [Alternative terminology](#alternative-terminology)
    -   [`Core.Type` is an empty named constraint](#coretype-is-an-empty-named-constraint)
    -   [Write tuple types differently than tuples](#write-tuple-types-differently-than-tuples)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

Define a "type" to be a value of type `type`. Contexts expecting a type perform
an implicit conversion to `type`. Values like `()`, `(i32, i32)`, and `{}` are
no longer types, but instead implicitly convert to `type`. Values of interface
or constraint type (now called "facets") are similarly not formally types but
implicitly convert to `type`.

The practical impact to the language semantics is relatively small. This
proposal primarily establishes clearer, more principled terminology and design
concepts with a few narrow improvements to the design's consistency.

> ## Problem

Reviewer 3: Another problem that was raised [on 2022-12-07](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gnJBTfY81fZYvI_QXjwKk1uQHYBNHGqRLI2BS_cYYNQ/edit?resourcekey=0-ql1Q1WvTcDvhycf8LbA9DQ#heading=h.qu6e01wbzrhz):
> [We] don't want `i32 as Sortable` and `i32 as Hashable` to be different _as types_, even though we want them to be different

Author: Added a suggestion of using "type" instead of "facet" to the terminology section in alternatives considered, including this example for why we don't want to do that.

type parameter, we will look in the type of `T`, which is `Printable`.

## Rationale

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    -   Making the behavior of tuples and empty structs more like other types is
        easier for tooling to handle.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   The transition between templates and generics is made smoother by
        changing compound member access to behave consistently regardless of
        whether the left-hand operand is a type.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Bottoming out at the same type, `type`, for all types is likely to be
        easier to understand. However, having `(i32, i32)` not be the type of a
        pair of integers, but instead be _implicitly convertible to_ the type of
        a pair of integers, is likely to be harder to understand. It's unclear
        which of these will be more dominant, but the new behavior is more
        consistent.

> ### Teachability

Reviewer 3: Concern from @mconst : expressions of the form `() as type` will appear in type checking error messages.
```
fn F(x: i32);
// Error: `F` expected a value of type `i32`, not a value of type `() as type`
❌ F(());
```
Alternatively, we could give `() as tuple` a name:
```
fn F(x: i32);
// Error: `F` expected a value of type `i32`, not a value of type `Tuple()`
❌ F(());
```
Once we have that, will people gravitate to just using `Tuple()` directly, and do we still need the implicit conversion from `()` to `Tuple()`?

Author: Added a section on this. I think the solution here is just to not include the `as type` when pretty-printing tuple types, unless it's needed for disambiguation (which should be rare!).

-   If `type` is an alias to `Core.Type`, then either the implementation would
    need to ensure that it introduces no member names and no constraints, or it
    would need to faithfully look into `Core.Type` every type a property of
    `type` is consulted, adding either compile-time cost or complexity to the
    implementation.

Given that we have no current desire to add member names or constraints to
`type`, we do not get any benefit from defining it in the Carbon library. If we
later choose to make `type` imply some other constraints by default, such as
`Sized` or `Movable`, this decision should be revisited.

This was discussed in:

-   [#naming on 2022-10-31](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/963846118964350976/1036750048899366954)
-   [#syntax on 2022-10-27](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/1035222720864071740)
-   [open discussion on 2022-10-31](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#heading=h.9x8m0qwhuux)

### Write tuple types differently than tuples

We considered having the way to write tuple tuples be different than tuples. So

> instead of `var x: (i32, i32) = (1, 2);` you might write:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We considered having the way to write tuple types be different than tuples. So
instead of `var x: (i32, i32) = (1, 2);` you might write:
```

```carbon
var x: TupleType(i32, i32) = (1, 2);

// Or, with dedicated syntax:
var y: (|i32, i32|) = (1, 2);
```

There are a few reasons we decided not to go with this approach:

-   There is a significant cost to having more balanced delimiters, particularly
    ones consisting of multiple characters.
-   Since types are values in Carbon, `(i32, i32)` is a valid and meaningful

>     expression. Users would be surprised if they cannot use it as a type.

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to include this example from the discussion on 2022-12-07, which is legal with this proposal but not this alternative:

```
var (x: i32, y: i32) = (1, 2);
var p: (i32, i32) = (1, 2);
```

Author: Added.

-   We expect that, when teaching or speaking casually, we would not need to
    explain that `(i32, i32)` was not a type but was usable as a type. That
    distinction would generally not affect users, who would generally be able to
    treat the type of a tuple as the tuple of the types of its elements.
-   This would prevent operations from working generically on both tuples values
    and tuple types. We would need to instead duplicate the set of operations.
    For example, there would need to be separate `TupleCat` and `TupleTypeCat`
    operations to perform concatenation. This would be extra machinery, and a
    burden for users to know about all of the functions and call the right one.

This was discussed

> [in the #syntax channel on 2022-11-03](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/1037793379813167166).

Reviewer 3: Additional discussion since then
```suggestion
[in the #syntax channel on 2022-11-03](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/1037793379813167166)
and
[in open discussion on on 2022-12-07](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gnJBTfY81fZYvI_QXjwKk1uQHYBNHGqRLI2BS_cYYNQ/edit?resourcekey=0-ql1Q1WvTcDvhycf8LbA9DQ#heading=h.qu6e01wbzrhz).
```

-   [Issue #508](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/508)
    raised the question of whether we want tuples like `((), (), ())` to be
    self-typed.

> -   [Issue #2360](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2360)

Reviewer 3: #2360 is this proposal, not an issue.

Author: ```suggestion
-   [Issue #2113](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2113)
```

is a significant change in how we describe those rules. We now use the following
terminology:

-   A _type_ is a value of type `type`.

> -   A _facet type_ is a constrained or unconstrained version of `type`, such as

Reviewer 4: (Rebasing a previous comment to the new terminology)

I have a hard time understanding this definition, and consequently the definition of "facet" -- it's especially unclear what it means for something to be a "version" of `type`. I don't understand the nuances here well enough to suggest a complete alternative, but if the following is close to accurate, maybe it could be a starting point?

> A _facet_ is a value formed by applying a set of constraints to a type, such as `i32 as Hashable`, and a _facet type_ is a type whose values are formed by applying the same constraints to different underlying types.

Author: I've rearranged this; is it clearer now?

    -   Otherwise, `impl` lookup is not performed:
        -   `MyInterface.AliasForInterfaceMember` finds the member in the
            interface `MyInterface` and does not perform `impl` lookup.
-   For a compound member access `a.(b)` where `b` names a member of an
    interface `I`, `impl` lookup is performed for `T as I`, where:
    -   If `b` is an instance member, `T` is the type of `a`.
        -   `my_value.(Interface.InstanceInterfaceMember)()`, where `my_value`
            is of type `MyClass`, uses `MyClass as Interface`.
        -   `MyClass.(Interface.InstanceInterfaceMember)()` uses
            `type as Interface`.
    -   Otherwise, `a` is implicitly converted to `I`, and `T` is the result of
        symbolically evaluating the converted expression.
        -   `MyClass.(Interface.NonInstanceInterfaceMember)()` uses
            `MyClass as Interface`.
        -   `my_value.(Interface.NonInstanceInterfaceMember)()` is an error
            unless `my_value` implicitly converts to a type.

This approach aims to change as little as possible of the existing `impl` lookup
behavior while removing inconsistencies and behavioral differences based on

> whether a value is a type.

Reviewer 3: I think this is all good, except it doesn't seem like all the alternatives we considered are well covered.

We talked about this 11-10: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tEt4iM6vfcY0O0DG0uOEMIbaXcZXlNREc2ChNiEtn_w/edit#
and in #syntax starting 11-07: https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/1039298322625744987

  x.Static();
  T.Static();
  // ❌ Uses `T as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  T.Method();
  // ✅ OK, instance is provided. Uses `T as Iface`.
  x.Method();
  x.(T.Method)();

  // ❌ Would use `(x as Iface).Static`.
  // Error because `x` is not a symbolic constant.
  x.(Iface.Static)();
  // ✅ Uses `(T as Iface).Static`.
  T.(Iface.Static)();
  // ✅ Uses `(type as Iface).Static`.
  type.(Iface.Static)();

  // ✅ Uses `(T as Iface).Method`, with `me = x`.
  x.(Iface.Method)();
  // ✅ Uses `(type as Iface).Method`, with `me = T`.
  T.(Iface.Method)();
}

base class Base {
  fn Static();
  fn Method[me: Self]();
  alias IfaceStatic = Iface.Static;
  alias IfaceMethod = Iface.Method;
}
external impl Base as Iface { ... }

fn G(b: Base) {
  // ✅ OK
  b.Static();
  Base.Static();
  // ❌ Uses `Base as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  Base.Method();
  // ✅ OK
  b.Method();
  b.(Base.Method)();

  // ✅ OK, same as `(Base as Iface).Static()`.
  b.IfaceStatic();
  Base.IfaceStatic();
  // ❌ Uses `Base as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  Base.IfaceMethod();
  // ✅ OK, uses `Base as Iface`.
  b.IfaceMethod();
  b.(Base.IfaceMethod)();

>   b.((Base as Iface).Method)();

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  b.((Base as Iface).Method)();
  b.(Iface.Method)();
```

}

class Derived extends Base {}
external impl Derived as Iface { ... }

fn H(d: Derived) {
  // ✅ OK, calls `Base.Static`.
  d.Static();
  Derived.Static();
  // ❌ Uses `Derived as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  Derived.Method();
  // ✅ OK, calls `Base.Method`.
  d.Method();
  d.(Base.Method)();
  d.(Derived.Method)();

  // ✅ OK, same as `(Derived as Iface).Static()`.
  d.IfaceStatic();
  Derived.IfaceStatic();
  // ❌ Uses `Derived as Iface`, but method call is missing an instance.
  Derived.IfaceMethod();
  // ✅ OK, uses `Derived as Iface`.
  d.IfaceMethod();
  d.(Derived.IfaceMethod)();

>   d.((Derived as Iface).Method)();

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  d.((Derived as Iface).Method)();
  d.(Iface.Method)();
```
